docs: add web server schema (OpenAPI) reference page (#2434)
apify/apify-docs: sources/platform/actors/development/actor_definition/web_server_schema/index.md

---
title: Web server schema
sidebar_label: Web server schema

> sidebar_position: 6.5

Reviewer: Can we not use decimals in sidebar position please?

> description: >-

Reviewer: what is the point of this?

>   Attach an OpenAPI specification to your Actor to enable the interactive Endpoints tab in Apify Console and Apify Store, where you can browse and test endpoints.

Reviewer 2: The tab is currently still named "Standby". I do have a change for it that will make it "Endpoints", but it will also change the copy a bit (to be the same as Store in Console and apify-web)
It means you will need to update the screenshot

Reviewer: any timeline for this ? I assume this docs have to ship before the changes you mention so we should use current  labels and update accordingly once change happens

slug: /actors/development/actor-definition/web-server-schema
---

> The `webServerSchema` field in `.actor/actor.json` attaches an [OpenAPI 3.x](https://spec.openapis.org/oas/v3.0.3) specification to your Actor. You can define the schema for any Actor that exposes an HTTP server. When you enable [standby mode](/platform/actors/development/programming-interface/standby), Apify Console and Apify Store render an interactive **Endpoints** tab on the Actor's detail page, where you can browse endpoints, inspect request and response schemas, and send requests directly from the browser.

Reviewer: This is **Standby** per screenshot, docs need to reflect current status

```suggestion
The `webServerSchema` field in `.actor/actor.json` attaches an [OpenAPI 3.x](https://spec.openapis.org/oas/v3.0.3) specification to your Actor. You can define the schema for any Actor that exposes an HTTP server. When you enable [standby mode](/platform/actors/development/programming-interface/standby), Apify Console and Apify Store render an interactive **Standby** tab on the Actor's detail page. From there you can browse endpoints, inspect request and response schemas, and send requests directly from the browser.
```

                        "name": "query",
                        "in": "query",
                        "required": true,
                        "schema": { "type": "string" }
                    }
                ],
                "responses": {
                    "200": {
                        "description": "Search results"
                    }
                }
            }
        }
    }
}
```

### Embed inline

```json title=".actor/actor.json"
{
    "actorSpecification": 1,
    "name": "my-api-actor",
    "version": "1.0",
    "usesStandbyMode": true,
    "webServerSchema": {
        "openapi": "3.0.0",
        "info": {
            "title": "My API Actor",
            "version": "1.0.0"
        },
        "paths": {
            "/health": {
                "get": {
                    "summary": "Health check",
                    "responses": {
                        "200": { "description": "OK" }
                    }
                }
            }
        }
    }
}
```

Follow the standard [OpenAPI 3.x format](https://spec.openapis.org/oas/latest.html) to describe your endpoints, parameters, request bodies, and responses.

## Build and deploy

> The platform validates `webServerSchema` at build time, similar to other Actor schemas like [input schema](/platform/actors/development/actor-definition/input-schema) and [dataset schema](/platform/actors/development/actor-definition/dataset-schema). If the spec is malformed, the build fails with a validation error.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The build process validates `webServerSchema`, similar to other Actor schemas like [input schema](/platform/actors/development/actor-definition/input-schema) and [dataset schema](/platform/actors/development/actor-definition/dataset-schema). If the spec is malformed, the build fails with a validation error.
```

> Once deployed, the **Endpoints** tab appears automatically on the Actor's detail page when you enable [standby mode](/platform/actors/development/programming-interface/standby). It renders your spec with [Swagger UI](https://swagger.io/tools/swagger-ui/) and handles authentication automatically - Actor users can send requests without configuring API tokens.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Once deployed, the **Standby** tab appears automatically on the Actor's detail page when you enable [standby mode](/platform/actors/development/programming-interface/standby). It renders your spec with [Swagger UI](https://swagger.io/tools/swagger-ui/) and handles authentication automatically - Actor users can send requests without configuring API tokens.
```

:::note Servers field is overwritten

> The platform replaces the `servers` array in your spec with the Actor's standby URL at display time. Custom server URLs are ignored.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Your `servers` array is replaced with the Actor's standby URL at display time. Custom server URLs are ignored.
```

:::

## Related fields

| Field | Description |
| --- | --- |

> | `usesStandbyMode` | Must be `true` for the **Endpoints** tab to appear. See [standby mode](/platform/actors/development/programming-interface/standby). |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| `usesStandbyMode` | Must be `true` for the **Standby** tab to appear. See [standby mode](/platform/actors/development/programming-interface/standby). |
```

> | `webServerSchema` | The OpenAPI spec that powers the **Endpoints** tab. Defined in [`.actor/actor.json`](/platform/actors/development/actor-definition/actor-json) as an inline object or a path to a JSON file. |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| `webServerSchema` | The OpenAPI spec that powers the **Standby** tab. Defined in [`.actor/actor.json`](/platform/actors/development/actor-definition/actor-json) as an inline object or a path to a JSON file. |
```
